---
title: "Term Paper References"
subtitle: "OCP 5050 Fall 2025"
author: "Jorge Eduardo Velasco Zavala"
date: "2025-10-15"
geometry: 
    - margin=1in
    - letterpaper
---
1. Olvera-Prado, E. R., Moreles, E., Zavala-Hidalgo, J. & Romero-Centeno, R. Upper–Lower Layer Coupling of Recurrent Circulation Patterns in the Gulf of Mexico. https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-21-0281.1 (2023) doi:10.1175/JPO-D-21-0281.1.

    This paper describe the upper-lower layer coupling of recurrent circulation patterns in the Gulf of Mexico, in this paper the authors use a numerical model free simulation in the Gulf of Mexico to analyze the circulation and identify if there are recurrent circulation patterns that can be identified by the use Hilbert Empirical Orthogonal Functions to separate this modes and study which patterns are can be explained by the variaze. The authors find there are actually some of this modes are related to the extension/retraction of the Loop Current as the most important patterns in the Gulf of Mexico, followed by other patterns that are more related to the bathymetry of the region. And the temporales phases confirm the existence of cyclical behavior of these patterns. This paper is a very good reference since it is very similar to the approach I am planning to follow to analyze the circulation in the Gulf of Mexico, since I will follow a very similar methology with the differece that I will also analyse the SSH and Temperature data.

2. Chang, Y.-L. & Oey, L.-Y. Why does the Loop Current tend to shed more eddies in summer and winter? Geophysical Research Letters 39, (2012).

    This paper analize the periodicities of the Loop Current Eddies shedding in the Gulf of Mexico, from both observational data and numerical model free simulations. The authors find that the shedding of the Loop Current Eddies is more frequent in summer and winter, stablishing that the periods are very wide and can go from 4 to 19 months, but this process might be favored by the seasonal variation in winds deu to the intensification of the transport in the Yucatan which ocurrs in winter and spring, while in the summer the transport is weaker and the shedding is less frequent. This is an interestin paper since it tries to explain the dynamical process that favors the shedding of the Loop Current Eddies and while they are not completely periodic, there are periods event that might increse the likelihood of the shedding of these Eddies.

3. Sturges, W., Lugo‐Fernandez, A., and Shargel, M. D. "Introduction to circulation in the Gulf of Mexico." Circulation in the Gulf of Mexico: Observations and models 161 (2005): 1-10.

    This paper provides a very good introduction to the circulation in the Gulf of Mexico, ans some of the main fearture, like the Loop Current which is the dominant current in the region transporting water from the Caribbean Sea and leaving throught the Florida Straits to become the Gulf Stream. Also, in this paper the author describe the generalities of the eddies that detach from the Loop Current and are fundamental for the deep circulation since the can reach depths of 100 meters and diameters of upto 300 kilometers. In this paper, they also describe some of the generalities of the coastal circulations, sea level rise and the interaction of the Gulf with huracanes. This is a very good introduction to the circulation in the Gulf of Mexico, even if it is a bit old, it generalize some of the main caracteristics of the Gulf of Mexico, although some newer papers provide better understanding of the eddies and their behavior in the region.

4. Pérez-Brunius, P. et al. Dominant Circulation Patterns of the Deep Gulf of Mexico. https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-17-0140.1 (2018) doi:10.1175/JPO-D-17-0140.1.

    In this paper the authors focus on the use of observational data in the Gulf of Mexico to understand the deep circulation patterns in the region, also focusing in the western region that is not as well studied as the eastern region region that is dominated by the Loop Current. The authors find that in the wetern region there is a very interesting cyclonic gyre in the Sigsbee Plain that is linked to linked to the eddy–topography interaction via bottom stress as the driving mechanism. Another importan caracteristic of the circulation in the rigion is the boundary current that folows the continental slope of the Gulf region, tha according to the data from the floaters, it can be semipermanent in nature encompassing most of the western region of the Gulf of Mexico, since the ester region is mostly dominated by the Loop Current. So these are very important contributions to the understanding of the deep circulation in the Gulf of Mexico, and the data is coming from real messurements obtained from floaters and moored instruments. So, as explained in Olvera-Prado et al. (2023), I also should be able to observe some of the explained variance from the modes I compute that is attributed to these patterns.

5. Brokaw, R. J., Subrahmanyam, B., Trott, C. B. & Chaigneau, A. Eddy Surface Characteristics and Vertical Structure in the Gulf of Mexico from Satellite Observations and Model Simulations. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 125, e2019JC015538 (2020).

    In this paper focus on undertanding the caracteristic of the eddies in the Gulf of Mexico for both ciclonic and anticiclonic eddies. They also describe the vertical structure of salinity, temperature and chlorophyll. This paper, also analyze the espacial distribution of this ciclonic and anticiclonic and the effect of large climate features also have significan effect on the eddies. This is a very intersting paper that I need to read more carefully to get a better undestanding of how important are the eddies to the Gulf of Mexico circulation. 